# Introduction
The increase in data processing capabilities of modern computers and the development of analytical tools allows to create more and more sophisticated computing systems. In the beginning, they were just assisting people in organizational and bookkeeping tasks, cataloguing the data and therefore decreasing access time. Now, while still supporting users, they attempt to play the role of domain experts.  
It is estimated that 10-20% of population suffers from allergy-related conditions. That number is even higher among children – 20-30%. Symptoms can range from almost undetectable to excessive continuous swelling resulting in serious changes in the patients’ organisms.  After establishing which allergen is responsible, the attempts are made to alleviate the symptoms and, at the same time, to remove the allergen from the patients surroundings. Unfortunately this is not always possible, for example in case of the grass pollen allergy.  
The thesis is an attempt of a secondary analysis of data collected during clinical tests on specific immunotherapy (SIT), conducted by Dr. Ewa Cichocka-Jarosz [][#Cichocka-Jarosz:1997]. SIT is a long-term therapy, which aims at decreasing the discomfort of allergy symptoms. Regular visits at a clinic are required, increasing the costs and causing further inconvenience for the patients.  
The research at the Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics at Colllegium Medicum of the Jagiellonian University comprised of a complete standard statistical analysis of the data using the SAS software suite. Tests conducted included, among others:

* Repeated variance analysis tests (ANOVA), with additional verification of the means’ differences using the Duncan test for normal distribution variables  
* Kruskall-Wallis test for remaining variables [][#Cichocka-Jarosz:1997]

> The aim of the thesis is to develop, based on the knowledge extracted from existing data, a decision support system, assisting doctors in prescribing an appropriate  therapy path to the patients.

The system should assess risks and adequacy of the prescribed treatment. 

Specific immunotherapy is a new method of allergy treatment, therefore the number of publications on patients’ responsiveness to therapy is small. The author is not aware of any computer system related to SIT.  
The data analyses performed for the purposes of this thesis were conducted utilizing artificial neural networks and genetic algorithms. Initial trial of predicting the patients’ chances for deterioration after beginning therapy was not satisfactory. Due to limited amount of learning data system was not able to precisely describe the level of deterioration of patients’ condition. It could, however, predict tendencies. Rate of success for predicting the increase of symptoms during therapy was 72%. The objective of building a decision support system has been met.  
Additionally, a system allowing for heuristic selection of optimal neural network and training it, was tested. 

An introduction to immunotherapy can be found in [Chapter 2][]. Being different in scope than the rest of the thesis, this chapter also provides some information on the functions of the immune system. The issues relating to neural networks are outlined in [Chapter 3][]. Emphasis was put on multilayered networks, as they were later used when predicting the therapy outcomes. A discussion on genetic algorithms used to select the neural network architecture is featured in [Chapter 4][]. [Chapter 5][] contains information on the initial data preparation and analysis. The analysis was based on Statistica Neural Networks 6 software suite and the JIM system, which was created by the author. JIM made possible the initial data preparation and, at the later analytic stage, the heuristic selection of the network. [Chapter 6][] is focused on the JIM system. Discussed are its capabilities and the choice of technologies utilized. [Chapter 7][] discusses the results obtained and the technologies employed.  
The thesis is concluded with the bibliographical review, [Appendix A][] (specifications of the JIM computer system created) and the [Appendix B][] (listing the contents of the attached CD).
