# Immunology [Chapter 2]
Despite the fact that the allergology is a relatively new field, its roots can be traced to the beginning of the XIX century. In 1819, John Bostock described a “periodical affection of the eyes and chest”, now known as pollenosis or, more commonly, hay fever. “It is commonly thus assumed, that it (the ailment) is caused by dust from the fresh hay” (quotation from 1.). After trying to look for this condition among the Englishmen, he could only diagnose 28 cases. Obviously it was a marginal problem. Not until the middle of the XIX century its connection to pollen was observed and proved by Charles Blackley. His experiments with using a sticky microscope slide tied to a kite allowed him to demonstrate the presence of pollen at 500m above ground level. That meant it could be spread with the wind over large distances. Blackley was able to thus explain why he himself suffered from hay fever living in Manchester, without any direct exposure to plants producing allergenic pollen. Only in 1905 two pediatricians, Clemens von Pirquet and Bela Shick, proposed the term “allergy” to describe a varied responsiveness of human organism. After that, society began talking about innate predisposition to allergy in some organisms.  
An interesting case has been observed in 1919. Dr. Maximilian Ramirez treated a patient who apparently contracted asthma through a blood transfusion. Before then, the patient had been frequently around horses with no adverse effects. Then, after the transfusion, he had the first fit of the disease while enjoying a horse ride. It later turned out that the blood donor was an asthmatic, whose skin tests came out positive for horse hair. That case suggested there might exist a substance in blood that is responsible for allergies. That hypothesis had been developed by Prausnitz and Kustne, who proposed an existence of a blood agent, later called “reagin”.  
For a long time the immunology was not taken seriously, which resulted from, among others, a lack of precise research methods. A breakthrough was achieved thanks to the work of two separate teams: Bennich and Johanson’s and the Ishizakawas’ husband-wife team. They discovered a previously unknown immunoglobulin: immunoglobulin E (IgE) that encompasses also reagin antibodies. The teams shared their findings in 1968 and were awarded a Nobel Prize the next year. Allergology became a subfield of the clinical immunology. 

## The immune system
The human organism is constantly threatened by “intruders”. Defending against them and their removal is the responsibility of innate (nonspecific) and adaptive (specific) immune systems. External mechanisms of resistance include defensive barriers of epidermis and mucosal membrane.  
The surface of the epidermis is acidic, which prevents the growth of bacterial populations. Additionally, it is covered by suet, the sebaceous gland secretion, which is comprised of bacteria-killing unsaturated fatty acids. An important defensive mechanism of the epidermis is its constant shedding.  
Mucous membranes, potentially easier to penetrate for allergens, are covered with mucus, which is strongly antiseptic (lysozymes, interferon, and defensins). Additional antiseptic barrier in digestive and excretory systems is provided by the acidity of urine and gastric acid [][#Resmedica:UkladImmunologiczny].  
After the antigen penetrates the skin or mucous membrane, cellular-level innate immune mechanisms are activated and deliver a quick defensive response. These are the circulatory system cells, tasked with engulfing and digesting pathogens (macrophages, neutrophil granulocytes). Innate immune system also includes a special group of lymphocytes – natural killers (NK), whose main role is to destroy cancerous or virus-infected cells.  
Adaptive immunity systems, phylogenetically younger, target specific antigens and require more time to fully activate. Once started, they will deliver a timely, precise and effective protection on every future occasion, thanks to their immunological memory. Two populations of lymphocytes provide fundamental mechanism of the adaptive immune system: B cells, producing antibodies (immunoglobine M, immunoglobine E) and T cells, capable of  recognizing a specific antigen using their receptors. Two main types of T cells are CD4+ (T helper, Th) and CD8+ (cytotoxic T cell, Tc). Th cells of Th1 phenotype induce a specific inflammatory reaction, while the Th2 phenotype Th cells reduce inflammations, while stimulating IgE-dependent allergic reactions.  
APC (Antigen Presenting Cells) are the cells allowing the T cells to recognize the intruding antigens. Depending on the antigen penetration route, the role of the APC can be performed by skin cells (Langerhans cells), monocytes of the circulating blood, tissue macrophages, or dendritic cells of the nervous system. After intercepting the antigen, they travel through the lymphatic vessels to the lymph nodes, where they present it to the T cells and stimulate the T cells specific response. They display the external molecule on their surface, together with the tissue compatibility antigens. For the T cells to activate, an interaction between particular receptors on surfaces of T cells and APCs is required.  
Activated T cells produce particular cytokines. They are a signal for the B cells, which transform into plasmatic cells and synthesize a special type of antibodies. Most common is the immunoglobulin G fraction, comprising of 4 subclasses: <<IgG_1>>, <<IgG_2>>, <<IgG_3>>, and <<IgG_4>>. Defenses of the mucous membranes are founded upon the so called secretory IgA. Immunoglobulin M takes part in processes connected with phagocytosis and cells’ digestive functions. Immunoglobulin E is essential for the anaphylactic reactions. The functions of Immunoglobulin D are not well known. 

## IgE-dependent allergy
This disorder is an innate oversensitivity of the organism to given external agent existing in low concentrations. The most common allergens are substances present in air, called aeroallergens (dust mites, pollen, molds, animal hair and epidermis). Allergies to foods (grains, proteins of egg whites and yolks) are rarer and usually affect younger children. Patients suffering from IgE-dependent allergies typically have more Th2 phenotype T cells. Cytokines, produced by those cells, stimulate synthesizing of the allergen-specific IgE antibodies tied on the surface of the mast cells and also activate eosinophil granulocytes, which results in a chronic inflammatory reaction. When the allergen concentration reaches a defined level, mast cells activate (degranulate), releasing the inflammation mediators. Those include, among others: histamine (determining clinical symptoms like fits of sneezing, teary eyes, dyspnea or nettle-rash), cytokines (stimulating other cells into allergic reaction) or metabolite of the arachidonic acid (sustaining the inflammation).

## The increase in the number of allergies
Recently, there is a dynamic increase in the number of those affected by allergies (Grevers, Rocken, 2002). Epidemiological surveys proved that 25-30% of population in developed countries suffer from allergic ailments. Allergies have been the subject of many epidemiological and genetical research projects, whether clinical, experimental or environmental.  
There are international research project carried: IUATLD (asthma among adults), ISAAC (International Study of Asthma and Allergy in Childhood). It has been established that, besides genetic factors, child’s environment (concentration of the allergens, pollution) and the types of food introduced in the diet during the first year of life are essential in the development of allergies. 

## Allergen - specific Immunotherapy
Specific immunotherapy is the only currently known method of etiologic treatment of the pathomechanism of IgE-dependent allergies. The method has a proven positive effect on patients suffering from allergic rhinitis and conjunctivitis, as well as milder forms of asthma. For those allergic to hymenoptera venom (bees, wasps and hornets) it is a risk factor-determined treatment. The treatment consists of subcutaneous administrations of increasing dosages of purified allergen. The most common ones are pollen (trees, grass, rye, weeds) and dust mites. The objective of the therapy is to develop a tolerance of the immune system. Due to a degree of inertia of the process, the treatment usually lasts about 3 to 5 years. When treating patients allergic to pollen, the desensitization is performed a couple of weeks before the given plant’s pollen season. In case of grass allergy, the treatment takes place between February and April. Those allergic to dust mites require a year-round therapy. Strict qualification criteria include confirmation of the IgE-dependency of the ailment (positive skin tests, high level of IgE typical for a given allergen), together with typical clinical symptoms observed. Even assuming correct qualification, 10% of treated do not show any improvement [][#Alergologia:1998]. Because of the length of treatment, costs for the patients and trauma (injections), it is important to improve the precision of the qualifying criteria.  
During the treatment it is common to increase the level of medicating the patient. Moreover, it is actually possible to further sensitize the patient, that is to increase the allergic reaction, or even develop an allergy to different allergen [][#Cichocka-Jarosz:1997].

The underlying mechanisms of specific immunotherapy are not well known. Observed effects include:

1. Changing of T cells phenotypes:
    1. Prominent increase of the number of regulatory T cells (Tr)
    2. Increase of the number of Th1 T cells
    3. Decrease in the number of Th2 lymphocytes, which mediate the IgE-dependent reactions. 
2. Increased apoptosis (dying of cells) of the Th2 lymphocytes
3. An increase  of the concentration level of the cytokines typical for Th1 cells (interferon << gamma >>, interleukin 2)
4. A decrease in the concentration level of Th2 typical cytokines (interleukin 4, interleukin 5, GM-CSF)
5. Stimulating of the blocking antibodies production (IgG class)

Regardless of changes in immunological parameters, the most important criterion of improvement is the patients’ subjective perception of a decrease of discomfort and limiting the amount of medications administered. 
